---
toc: true
layout: post
description: Nature of Code note series
categories: [note, natureofcode, simulation, processing, p5js]
title: "[Nature of Code] Part 2: Fractals, Cellular Automata, and Flocking"
comments: true
---

## Fractals

The term **fractal** is coined by mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot in 1975. It means broken or fractured.


**A structure needs to have two properties to be a fractal:**

1. **Self-similarity: when you zoom in on it, it looks similar to (or exactly the same as) the whole.**
2. **Fine structure at small scale.**
3. **Generated from a recursive definition.**

A binary tree with infinite depth is an example of exact fractal.

The stock price curve is an example of **stochastic** fractal. When you zoom in, the shape isn't exactly the same, but it has the same quality, a quality of *squiggly randomness*. The coast line is another example.

A famous and extremely simple fractal pattern is the [Cantor Set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor_set). It divides a line into 3 equal segments and remove the middle one. You get the Cantor set by doing this to every segment recursively.

### Koch curve: the "monster curve"

The generation rule of the Koch curve is very similar to the Cantor set:

1. Divide a line into 3 equal segments
2. Remove the middle segment
3. Replace the middle segment with an equilateral triangle
4. Repeat this to all the line segments.

In code, the way to do this is to use two lists, `current` and `next`. Pseudocode:

```
Start with current = [line0], next = []
i = 0
while i < max_steps:

    for line in current:

        find all the points of interest on line: a, b, c, d, e
        (a is the left end, b is at the 1/3 mark, c is the tip of the triangle,
        d is the 2/3 mark, e is the right end)

        create the new line segments (ab, bc, cd, de) and add them to next

    current = next
    next = []
    i++
```

### Binary fractal tree

Generation rule:

1. Start with a vertical line, go to its tip
2. At the tip in 1, rotate 45 degrees and draw a new line with half the length
3. At the tip in 1, rotate -45 degrees and draw a new line with half the length
4. Go to the tips of 2 and 3, repeat.

In pseudocode,

```
branch(next_length):
    drawLine(0, 0, 0, -next_length)
    translate(0, -next_length)

    len = next_length/2
    if len > threshold:
        pushMatrix()
        rotate(theta)
        branch(len)
        popMatrix()

        pushMatrix()
        rotate(-theta)
        branch(len)
        popMatrix()
```

In each recursive step we call `branch()`.

#### Review: `pushMatrix()` and `popMatrix()`

Notice that `pushMatrix()` creates a new reference frame that saves the current transformation (the current translate and rotate state).

To visualize a reference frame state, it can be represented by a unit vector which has the starting point at the *new* `(0, 0)` and pointing to the *new* `(0, 1)` direction.

Then `popMatrix()` can forget about all the transformations performed after the last `pushMatrix()`, and restore to the previous state. Thus it's a *stack* of transformation "sandboxes".

These are Processing terminology. In P5.js they are called `push()` and `pop()`.

### L-Systems: applying recursion to text

An [L-system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L-system) or Lindenmayer system is a parallel rewriting system and a type of formal grammar. Lindenmayer introduced L-systems in 1968 to describe the behaviour of plant cells and to model the growth processes of plant development. L-systems have also been used to model the morphology of a variety of organisms and can be used to generate self-similar fractals.

An L-system has 3 components:

1. Alphabet: characters allowed in this L-system
2. Axiom: an initial string
3. Rule set: a mapping of character to its descendant(s)

For instance, we have an L-system that has

1. Alphabet: A, B
2. Axiom: A
3. Rule set: A -> ABA, B -> BBB

How does it work?

```
Gen 0: A

Gen 1: ABA

Gen 2: ABABBBABA

Gen 3: ABABBBABABBBBBBBBBABABBBABA

...
```

If we think about it as drawing things, set A to be drawing a line `-`, and B to be moving forward `_` (whitespace), then what is the effect above? Let's see,

```
Gen 0: -

Gen 1: - -

Gen 2: - -   - -

Gen 3: - -   - -         - -   - -

...
```

We have recreated the **Cantor set**!!

**This means that we can design L-systems that create fractal patterns**.




## Reference

- The Coding Train [videos](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLRqwX-V7Uu6bXUJvjnMWGU5SmjhI-OXef)
